README.md, before:

# Lumanitech ERP - Finance Database

MySQL database repository for the Finance module of Lumanitech ERP system.

## Overview

This repository contains **database schema, migrations, and seed data only** - no application code. The database is owned and accessed exclusively by the Finance API service.

## Repository Structure

```
lumanitech-erp-db-finance/
├── schema/                 # Base database schema (initial structure)
│   ├── 01_create_database.sql
│   ├── 02_accounts.sql
│   ├── 03_transactions.sql
│   ├── 04_transaction_lines.sql
│   ├── 05_fiscal_periods.sql
│   └── README.md
├── migrations/             # Versioned migration scripts (forward-only)
│   ├── V001__create_migration_tracking_table.sql
│   ├── V002__add_budget_tables.sql
│   ├── V003__add_currency_support.sql
│   └── README.md
├── seeds/                  # Sample/reference data (dev/test only)
│   ├── 01_currencies.sql
│   ├── 02_chart_of_accounts.sql
│   ├── 03_fiscal_periods.sql
│   └── README.md
├── scripts/                # Management and CI/CD scripts
│   ├── setup.sh           # Single deployment script
│   ├── validate.sh         # Validate SQL (CI-ready)
│   └── README.md
├── docs/                   # Documentation
│   ├── ARCHITECTURE.md     # Database architecture and ownership
│   └── SCHEMA.md           # Detailed schema documentation
├── .gitignore              # Git ignore rules
└── README.md               # This file
```

## Quick Start

### Prerequisites

- MySQL 8.0 or higher
- MySQL client (`mysql` command)
- Bash shell

### Setup Development Database

#### 1. Clone the Repository

```bash
git clone https://github.com/MathieuBengle/lumanitech-erp-db-finance.git
cd lumanitech-erp-db-finance
```

#### 2. Automated Setup (Recommended)

Use the setup script to create and initialize the database in one step:

```bash
# Basic setup (without seed data)
./scripts/setup.sh
./scripts/setup.sh --login-path=local

# With seed data for development
./scripts/setup.sh --with-seeds
./scripts/setup.sh --login-path=local --with-seeds

# Custom user or host
./scripts/setup.sh -u myuser -h localhost --with-seeds

# See all options
./scripts/setup.sh --help
```

The script will:
1. Create the database
2. Create all tables
3. Apply all migrations
4. Optionally load seed data

Note: the setup script supports using stored credentials from `mysql_config_editor`.
You can pass a saved login path with `--login-path NAME` or set the environment
variable `MYSQL_LOGIN_PATH=NAME` before running the script. When provided, the
script will not prompt for a password and will use the login path to connect.

Example using `mysql_config_editor` (recommended for local dev on WSL2/Linux):

```bash
# store credentials securely (runs interactively)
mysql_config_editor set --login-path=local --host=localhost --user=admin --password

# run setup using the saved login path
./scripts/setup.sh --login-path=local --with-seeds

# or export the env var instead of passing --login-path
export MYSQL_LOGIN_PATH=local
./scripts/setup.sh --with-seeds
```

If you don't use `mysql_config_editor`, the script will prompt once for the
database password and reuse it for all operations. Avoid passing passwords on
the command line in production.

You only need to enter your MySQL password **once**.

### Validate SQL Files

```bash
./scripts/validate.sh
```

## Database Ownership

### Owner: Finance API Service

The Finance database is **owned by the Finance API**. This means:

- ✅ All database access goes through the Finance API
- ✅ API contains all business logic and validation
- ✅ Database enforces referential integrity only
- ❌ No direct database access by other services
- ❌ No application code in this repository

### Access Control

| Access Type | Allowed For | Purpose |
|-------------|-------------|---------|
| Read/Write via API | Finance API Service | Normal operations |
| Direct SQL (read-only) | BI/Reporting tools | Analytics, reports |
| Direct SQL (admin) | DBAs | Maintenance, backups |
| Migration scripts | CI/CD pipeline | Schema updates |

## Migration Strategy

This project follows a **strict forward-only migration strategy**:

### Principles

1. **Versioned migrations** - Each migration has a unique version number
2. **Immutable migrations** - Once applied, NEVER modify a migration
3. **Forward-only** - No rollback scripts
4. **Tracked history** - All migrations tracked in `schema_migrations` table
5. **To fix errors** - Create a new migration, don't edit existing ones

### Migration Naming

```
V{version}__{description}.sql
```

Examples:
- `V001__create_migration_tracking_table.sql`
- `V002__add_budget_tables.sql`
- `V003__add_currency_support.sql`

### Creating Migrations

1. Determine next version number
2. Create file following naming convention
3. Write SQL with proper header comments
4. Test in development environment
5. Run validation: `./scripts/validate.sh`
6. Commit to repository
7. Apply via CI/CD pipeline

**See** [migrations/README.md](migrations/README.md) for detailed guidelines.

## Core Database Features

### Entities

- **Accounts** - Chart of accounts (hierarchical)
- **Transactions** - Journal entries (double-entry bookkeeping)
- **Transaction Lines** - Debit/credit line items
- **Fiscal Periods** - Financial reporting periods
- **Budgets** - Budget planning and tracking
- **Currencies** - Multi-currency support with exchange rates

### Key Features

- Double-entry bookkeeping enforcement
- Multi-currency transaction support
- Hierarchical chart of accounts
- Fiscal period management
- Budget vs. actual tracking
- Complete audit trail (timestamps, user tracking)
- Referential integrity via foreign keys

## CI/CD Integration

### Validation in CI

Add to your CI pipeline:

```yaml
# GitHub Actions example
- name: Validate SQL
  run: ./scripts/validate.sh
```

**Exit codes**:
- `0` - All validations passed
- `1` - Validation errors found

### Deployment

Recommended deployment process:

1. **Development**: Test migrations locally
2. **CI**: Validate SQL syntax and conventions
3. **Staging**: Apply migrations to staging database
4. **Validation**: Test with staging API
5. **Production**: Apply migrations during maintenance window

```bash
# Production deployment example (using mysql_config_editor)
mysql_config_editor set --login-path=finance_prod --host=db-prod.example.com --user=finance_app
./scripts/setup.sh --login-path=finance_prod
```

## Documentation

Detailed documentation available in `/docs`:

- **[ARCHITECTURE.md](docs/ARCHITECTURE.md)** - Database architecture, ownership model, design principles
- **[SCHEMA.md](docs/SCHEMA.md)** - Complete schema documentation with all tables and relationships

Each directory also has its own README:
- [schema/README.md](schema/README.md) - Schema files documentation
- [migrations/README.md](migrations/README.md) - Migration guidelines and best practices
- [seeds/README.md](seeds/README.md) - Seed data usage and customization
- [scripts/README.md](scripts/README.md) - Script usage and CI integration

## Development Guidelines

### Making Changes

1. **Never modify existing migrations** - Create new ones
2. **Test locally first** - Use development database
3. **Validate before committing** - Run `./scripts/validate.sh`
4. **Document changes** - Update docs if schema changes significantly
5. **Keep migrations focused** - One logical change per migration

### Code Style

- Use consistent formatting (2 or 4 space indentation)
- Add comments for complex logic
- Follow existing naming conventions
- Use UPPERCASE for SQL keywords
- Include descriptive header comments

### Testing

- Test migrations in isolation
- Verify foreign key constraints
- Check index performance
- Test with seed data
- Validate business rules

## Security

- ⚠️ **Never commit credentials** to repository
- Use environment variables for passwords
- Database credentials managed separately
- SSL/TLS for database connections in production
- Principle of least privilege for database users

## Support and Contribution

### Reporting Issues

- Database bugs: Create issue with error logs
- Schema questions: Check documentation first
- Migration problems: Include migration version and error

### Contributing

1. Fork the repository
2. Create feature branch
3. Add your migration(s)
4. Validate with `./scripts/validate.sh`
5. Submit pull request
6. Ensure CI checks pass

## License

[Specify your license here]

## Authors

- Lumanitech ERP Team

## Related Projects

- **lumanitech-erp-finance-api** - Finance API service (owner of this database)
- **lumanitech-erp-db-*** - Other module databases

---

**Remember**: This is a database repository only. No application code belongs here.

Commit message:

Enhance deployment script and documentation: make deploy.sh executable, improve MySQL login handling, and update README with usage examples and options

README.md, after:

# Lumanitech ERP - Finance Database

MySQL database repository for the Finance module of Lumanitech ERP system.

## Overview

This repository contains **database schema, migrations, and seed data only** - no application code. The database is owned and accessed exclusively by the Finance API service.

## Repository Structure

```
lumanitech-erp-db-finance/
├── schema/                 # Base database schema (initial structure)
│   ├── 01_create_database.sql
│   ├── 02_accounts.sql
│   ├── 03_transactions.sql
│   ├── 04_transaction_lines.sql
│   ├── 05_fiscal_periods.sql
│   └── README.md
├── migrations/             # Versioned migration scripts (forward-only)
│   ├── V001__create_migration_tracking_table.sql
│   ├── V002__add_budget_tables.sql
│   ├── V003__add_currency_support.sql
│   └── README.md
├── seeds/                  # Sample/reference data (dev/test only)
│   ├── 01_currencies.sql
│   ├── 02_chart_of_accounts.sql
│   ├── 03_fiscal_periods.sql
│   └── README.md
├── scripts/                # Management and CI/CD scripts
│   ├── setup.sh           # Single deployment script
│   ├── validate.sh         # Validate SQL (CI-ready)
│   └── README.md
├── docs/                   # Documentation
│   ├── ARCHITECTURE.md     # Database architecture and ownership
│   └── SCHEMA.md           # Detailed schema documentation
├── .gitignore              # Git ignore rules
└── README.md               # This file
```

## Quick Start

### Prerequisites

- MySQL 8.0 or higher
- MySQL client (`mysql` command)
- Bash shell

### Setup Development Database

#### 1. Clone the Repository

```bash
git clone https://github.com/MathieuBengle/lumanitech-erp-db-finance.git
cd lumanitech-erp-db-finance



#### 2. Automated Setup (Recommended)

Use the setup script to create and initialize the database in one step:

```bash
# Make the deployment script executable (required once)
chmod +x ./scripts/deploy.sh

# Basic setup (without seed data)
./scripts/setup.sh
./scripts/setup.sh --login-path=local

# With seed data for development
./scripts/setup.sh --with-seeds
./scripts/setup.sh --login-path=local --with-seeds

# Custom user or host
./scripts/setup.sh -u myuser -h localhost --with-seeds

# See all options
./scripts/setup.sh --help
```

The script will:
1. Create the database
2. Create all tables
3. Apply all migrations
4. Optionally load seed data

Note: the setup script supports using stored credentials from `mysql_config_editor`.
You can pass a saved login path with `--login-path NAME` or set the environment
variable `MYSQL_LOGIN_PATH=NAME` before running the script. When provided, the
script will not prompt for a password and will use the login path to connect.

Example using `mysql_config_editor` (recommended for local dev on WSL2/Linux):

```bash
# store credentials securely (runs interactively)
mysql_config_editor set --login-path=local --host=localhost --user=admin --password

# run setup using the saved login path
./scripts/setup.sh --login-path=local --with-seeds

# or export the env var instead of passing --login-path
export MYSQL_LOGIN_PATH=local
./scripts/setup.sh --with-seeds
```

The deployment script now supports several options that make CI-friendly setups consistent with the other repos:

- `--login-path=NAME` or the `MYSQL_LOGIN_PATH` environment variable reuse a stored `mysql_config_editor` path instead of prompting for passwords.
- `--database=NAME`, `--host=HOST` and `--user=USER` allow overriding the defaults (for example `./scripts/deploy.sh --database=lumanitech_projects --login-path=local`).
- If no login path can be found, the script prompts once for the MySQL password and reuses it for the entire run, so credentials never appear on the command line.

The script prints the selected login path (or reports that it will use an interactive password) at startup, so you always know which credentials were used.

### Validate SQL Files

```bash
./scripts/validate.sh
```

## Database Ownership

### Owner: Finance API Service

The Finance database is **owned by the Finance API**. This means:

- ✅ All database access goes through the Finance API
- ✅ API contains all business logic and validation
- ✅ Database enforces referential integrity only
- ❌ No direct database access by other services
- ❌ No application code in this repository

### Access Control

| Access Type | Allowed For | Purpose |
|-------------|-------------|---------|
| Read/Write via API | Finance API Service | Normal operations |
| Direct SQL (read-only) | BI/Reporting tools | Analytics, reports |
| Direct SQL (admin) | DBAs | Maintenance, backups |
| Migration scripts | CI/CD pipeline | Schema updates |

## Migration Strategy

This project follows a **strict forward-only migration strategy**:

### Principles

1. **Versioned migrations** - Each migration has a unique version number
2. **Immutable migrations** - Once applied, NEVER modify a migration
3. **Forward-only** - No rollback scripts
4. **Tracked history** - All migrations tracked in `schema_migrations` table
5. **To fix errors** - Create a new migration, don't edit existing ones

### Migration Naming

```
V{version}__{description}.sql
```

Examples:
- `V001__create_migration_tracking_table.sql`
- `V002__add_budget_tables.sql`
- `V003__add_currency_support.sql`

### Creating Migrations

1. Determine next version number
2. Create file following naming convention
3. Write SQL with proper header comments
4. Test in development environment
5. Run validation: `./scripts/validate.sh`
6. Commit to repository
7. Apply via CI/CD pipeline

**See** [migrations/README.md](migrations/README.md) for detailed guidelines.

## Core Database Features

### Entities

- **Accounts** - Chart of accounts (hierarchical)
- **Transactions** - Journal entries (double-entry bookkeeping)
- **Transaction Lines** - Debit/credit line items
- **Fiscal Periods** - Financial reporting periods
- **Budgets** - Budget planning and tracking
- **Currencies** - Multi-currency support with exchange rates

### Key Features

- Double-entry bookkeeping enforcement
- Multi-currency transaction support
- Hierarchical chart of accounts
- Fiscal period management
- Budget vs. actual tracking
- Complete audit trail (timestamps, user tracking)
- Referential integrity via foreign keys

## CI/CD Integration

### Validation in CI

Add to your CI pipeline:

```yaml
# GitHub Actions example
- name: Validate SQL
  run: ./scripts/validate.sh
```

**Exit codes**:
- `0` - All validations passed
- `1` - Validation errors found

### Deployment

Recommended deployment process:

1. **Development**: Test migrations locally
2. **CI**: Validate SQL syntax and conventions
3. **Staging**: Apply migrations to staging database
4. **Validation**: Test with staging API
5. **Production**: Apply migrations during maintenance window

```bash
# Production deployment example (using mysql_config_editor)
mysql_config_editor set --login-path=finance_prod --host=db-prod.example.com --user=finance_app
./scripts/setup.sh --login-path=finance_prod
```

## Documentation

Detailed documentation available in `/docs`:

- **[ARCHITECTURE.md](docs/ARCHITECTURE.md)** - Database architecture, ownership model, design principles
- **[SCHEMA.md](docs/SCHEMA.md)** - Complete schema documentation with all tables and relationships

Each directory also has its own README:
- [schema/README.md](schema/README.md) - Schema files documentation
- [migrations/README.md](migrations/README.md) - Migration guidelines and best practices
- [seeds/README.md](seeds/README.md) - Seed data usage and customization
- [scripts/README.md](scripts/README.md) - Script usage and CI integration

## Development Guidelines

### Making Changes

1. **Never modify existing migrations** - Create new ones
2. **Test locally first** - Use development database
3. **Validate before committing** - Run `./scripts/validate.sh`
4. **Document changes** - Update docs if schema changes significantly
5. **Keep migrations focused** - One logical change per migration

### Code Style

- Use consistent formatting (2 or 4 space indentation)
- Add comments for complex logic
- Follow existing naming conventions
- Use UPPERCASE for SQL keywords
- Include descriptive header comments

### Testing

- Test migrations in isolation
- Verify foreign key constraints
- Check index performance
- Test with seed data
- Validate business rules

## Security

- ⚠️ **Never commit credentials** to repository
- Use environment variables for passwords
- Database credentials managed separately
- SSL/TLS for database connections in production
- Principle of least privilege for database users

## Support and Contribution

### Reporting Issues

- Database bugs: Create issue with error logs
- Schema questions: Check documentation first
- Migration problems: Include migration version and error

### Contributing

1. Fork the repository
2. Create feature branch
3. Add your migration(s)
4. Validate with `./scripts/validate.sh`
5. Submit pull request
6. Ensure CI checks pass

## License

[Specify your license here]

## Authors

- Lumanitech ERP Team

## Related Projects

- **lumanitech-erp-finance-api** - Finance API service (owner of this database)
- **lumanitech-erp-db-*** - Other module databases

---

**Remember**: This is a database repository only. No application code belongs here.
